Lambdas (#3848)
carbon-language/carbon-lang: proposals/p3848.md

# Lambdas

<!--
Part of the Carbon Language project, under the Apache License v2.0 with LLVM
Exceptions. See /LICENSE for license information.
SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0 WITH LLVM-exception
-->

[Pull request](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/pull/3848)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Syntax Overview](#syntax-overview)
-   [Introducer](#introducer)
-   [Positional Parameters](#positional-parameters)
    -   [Positional Parameter Restrictions](#positional-parameter-restrictions)
-   [Function Captures](#function-captures)
    -   [Default Capture Mode](#default-capture-mode)
    -   [Capture Modes](#capture-modes)
-   [Function Fields](#function-fields)
-   [Copy Semantics](#copy-semantics)
-   [Self and Recursion](#self-and-recursion)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

> To support migration from C++ to Carbon, there must be valid syntax to capture

Reviewer: Stating the rationale solely in terms of C++ migration seems too narrow -- for example, it doesn't explain why we have positional parameters, or the `=>` syntax, which are unlikely to be used for C++ migration purposes. I think we want lambdas because they can make code easier to read, understand, and write, as well as because we need them for migration.

Author: Good call, thanks!

the behavior of C++ lambdas. They are defined at their point of use and are
often anonymous, meaning replacing them solely with function declarations will
create an ergonomic burden compounded by the need for the migration tool to
select a name. This proposal proposes a path forward to add lambdas to Carbon

> and augment function declarations accordingly.

Reviewer: I think of an abstract as a kind of summary of the document, but most of the content here is unique to the abstract, as far as I can tell. I'd reccommend moving most of this to the Rationale section, and focus the Abstract more on the key points of what's being proposed.

Author: Done! Should I move Rationale to the top or leave it at the bottom?

Reviewer: I think the way you have it now is good.

## Syntax Overview

**Proposal**: A largely continuous syntax between lambdas and function
declarations.

At a high level, lambdas and function declarations will look like the following.

```
let lambda1: auto = fn => T.Make();

let lambda2: auto = fn []() -> T { return T.Make(); };

fn FunctionDeclaration1 => T.Make();

fn FunctionDeclaration2[]() -> T { return T.Make(); }
```

There are functions which return an expression, such that the return type is
`auto`.

```
let lambda: auto = fn => T.Make();

fn FunctionDeclaration => T.Make();
```

And there are functions with an explicit return type that provide a body of
statements.

```
let lambda: auto = fn -> T { return T.Make(); };

fn FunctionDeclaration -> T { return T.Make(); }
```

There are even functions that provide a body of statements but no return value.

```
let lambda: auto = fn { Print(T.Make()); };

fn FunctionDeclaration { Print(T.Make()); }
```

Functions support [captures](#function-captures) and [fields](#function-fields)

> in the square brackets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in the square brackets (in addition to deduced parameters and the `Self` parameter).
```

Author: Worded this in a bit more of a verbose way, only to make it clear that `self: Self` and `addr self: Self*` are specifically for function *declarations* and specifically for such that exist inside a class/interface.

```
fn Foo(x: X) {
  let lambda: auto = fn [const copy x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(x, ++y); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[const copy x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(x, ++y); }
}
```

Functions also support so-called
["positional parameters"](#positional-parameters) that are defined at their
point of use using a dollar sign and a non-negative integer. They are implicitly
of type `auto`.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn { Print($0); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration { Print($0); }
}
```

> This is of course in addition to supporting explicit parameters.

Reviewer: This makes it sound kind of like a single function can have both.

```suggestion
Of course, functions can also have named parameters, but a single function can't have both
named and positional parameters.
```

Author: Perfect. Thanks!

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn(v: auto) { Print(v); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration(v: auto) { Print(v); }
}
```

And deduced parameters.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); }
}
```

To understand how the syntax between lambdas and function declarations is
reasonably "continuous", refer to this table of syntactic positions and the

> following code examples.

Reviewer: Consider presenting this information more like this, instead:

> Function definitions have one of the following syntactic forms (where items in square brackets are optional and independent):
>
> `fn` [_name_] [ _implicit-params_ ] [_tuple-pattern_] `=>` _expression_ `;`\
> `fn` [_name_] [ _implicit-params_ ] [_tuple-pattern_] [`->` _return-type_] `{` _statements_ `}`
>
> The first form is a shorthand for the second: "`=>` _expression_ `;`" is equivalent to "`-> auto { return ` _expression_ `; }`".
> 
> _implicit-params_ consists of square brackets enclosing an optional default capture mode and any number of explicit captures, function fields, and deduced parameters, all separated by commas. The default capture mode (if any) must come first; the other items can appear in any order. If _implicit-params_ is omitted, it is equivalent to `[]`.
>
> The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function declaration or a lambda expression.
>
> The presence of _tuple-pattern_ determines whether the function body uses named or positional parameters.
>
> The presence of "`->` _return-type_" determines whether the function body can (and must) return a value.

That's more abstract, but at least for me, it would make it much easier to see how this design is (and isn't) continuous.

Author: Awesome! I added this content right above the part that you highlighted. My reading of it is that these two blocks of text are not mutually exclusive. Do you disagree?

Reviewer: I agree they're not mutually exclusive. Personally I don't find the table and examples helpful, but they may work better for other people.

Reviewer 2: (I like having both, let's resolve this for now.)

|         E4         |        Body of Statements (with return value) ([positional parameters](#positional-parameters) disallowed)         |
|         F          |                                                Required Return Type                                                |
|         G          |                                             Function Declaration Name                                              |

```
// Lambdas (all the following are in an expression context and are
// themselves expressions)

fn => A1

fn[B, C] => A1

fn(D) => A2

fn[B, C](D) => A2

fn { E1; }

fn -> F { E2; }

fn[B, C] { E1; }

fn[B, C] -> F { E2; }

fn(D) { E3; }

fn(D) -> F { E4; }

fn[B, C](D) { E3; }

fn[B, C](D) -> F { E4; }
```

```
// Function Declarations (all the following are allowed as statements in a
// function body or as declarations in other scopes)

fn G => A1;

fn G[B, C] => A1;

fn G(D) => A2;

fn G[B, C](D) => A2;

fn G { E1; }

fn G -> F { E2; }

fn G[B, C] { E1; }

fn G[B, C] -> F { E2; }

fn G(D) { E3; }

fn G(D) -> F { E4; }

fn G[B, C](D) { E3; }

fn G[B, C](D) -> F { E4; }
```

> **Alternative Considered**: As opposed to a continuous syntax between lambdas

Reviewer: We often link to relevant alternatives from the relevant design docs. In order to make them linkable, I think they need to be marked with ### section headings.

Author: Had to employ embedded HTML tags to make this work. Hopefully that's ok.

Author: Unfortunately when I ran precommit on this, it removed these html tags from the table of contents, even though I manually added them. The sections are still linkable, they just don't show up in the TOC unfortunately.

Reviewer: Would it not work to do something like this?

```md
### Alternative Considered: Multiple kinds of lambdas

As opposed to a continuous syntax between lambdas...
```

fn FunctionDeclaration1 => T.Make();

fn FunctionDeclaration2[]() -> T { return T.Make(); }
```

**Alternative Considered**: Introduce with a sigil, such as `$` or `@`. Since
introducer punctuation is such a scarce resource, and since there was no
consensus on what sigil would best represent a lambda, and since there was a
desire to create a more continuous syntax between lambdas and function
declarations, this alternative was decided against.

```
let lambda1: auto = @ => T.Make();

let lambda2: auto = @[]() -> T { return T.Make(); };
```

## Positional Parameters

**Proposal**: Positional parameters, introduced in the body of a function by way
of the dollar sign and a corresponding non-negative parameter position integer
(ex: `$3`), are `auto` parameters to the function in which they are defined.
They can be used in any lambda or function declaration that lacks an explicit
parameter list (parentheses). They are variadic by design, meaning an unbounded
number of arguments can be passed to any function that lacks an explicit
parameter list. Only the parameters that are named in the body will be read
from, meaning the highest named parameter denotes the minimum number of

> arguments required by the function. Users are free to omit lower-numbered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arguments required by the function. The function body is free to omit lower-numbered
```

one enclosing function without an explicit parameter list. For example...

```
fn Foo1 {
  fn Bar1 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo1 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo2 {
  Print($0);
  fn Bar2 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo2 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo3 {
  fn Bar3 {
    Print($0);  // ❌ Invalid: Foo3 is already using positional parameters
  }
}

fn Foo4() {
  fn Bar4 {
    Print($0);  // ✅ Valid: Foo4 has explicit parameters
  }
}

fn Foo5 {
  fn Bar5() {}  // ✅ Valid: Bar5 has explicit parameters
}

fn Foo6() {
  my_list.Sort(
    fn => $0 < $1  // ✅ Valid: Foo6 has explicit parameters
  );
}
```

**Alternative Considered**: In addition to the proposed restrictions, an
additional restriction was considered. That being, visibility of functions with
positional parameters could be restricted to only non-public interfaces. **This
alternative will be put forth as a leads question before a decision is made.**

## Function Captures

**Proposal**: Function captures in Carbon mirror the non-init captures of C++.
Bindings defined in a scope visible to a function can be captured in the
function instance, be it a function declaration or a lambda. The lifetime of a

> capture is the lifetime of the function in which it exists. For example...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Proposal**: Function captures in Carbon mirror the non-init captures of C++.
A function capture declaration consists of a capture mode followed by the name of a
binding from the enclosing scope, and makes that identifier available in the
inner function body. The lifetime of a capture is the lifetime of the function in
which it exists. For example...
```

(I'm mainly trying to explicitly spell out the high-level syntax and semantics, so that the statement that they mirror C++ doesn't have to do quite so much heavy lifting.)

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(fn [copy handle] { handle.Process(); });
  thread.Join();
}
```

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  fn MyThread[copy]() { handle.Process(); }
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(MyThread);
  thread.Join();
}
```

> ### Default Capture Mode

Reviewer: I suggest putting this below the Capture Modes section. It's kind of disorienting to read about how to default a particular setting before reading about what the setting means.

square brackets.

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  fn MyThread[copy]() {
    handle.Process();  // `handle` is copy captured due to the default capture
                       // mode specifier of `copy`
  }
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(MyThread);
  thread.Join();
}
```

**Alternative Considered**: Previously, it was proposed that the default capture
mode would come after all the explicit captures. In addition, it was proposed
that the lack of any square brackets opted the function into capturing by
default with an implicitly defined default capture mode. These behaviors do not
mirror lambdas in C++ and so were decided against. Primarily, it was recognized
that it's valuable to be able to intermix explicit captures with deduced
parameters and fields in any order that makes the most sense for the context.
Without a clear justification for a rule that says they can't intermix, the more
flexible behavior was favored.

### Capture Modes

**Proposal**: `copy` and `ref` are the two primary forms of function captures.
They each have companion `const` versions. They are syntactically distinct from

> `let` and `var`. `let` and `var` can appear in binding patterns, such as

Reviewer: It feels tautological to say that `copy` and `ref` are syntactically distinct from `let` and `var`: they're different tokens, so of course they're syntactically distinct. I'd suggest instead saying that function captures are syntactically distinct from function fields. And probably that should go in the Function Captures section, because it seems more of a fact about function captures as a whole, not so much about the mode specifier tokens in particular.

[function fields](#function-fields), while `copy`, `ref`, `const copy` and
`const ref` can appear as function captures. The two sets of keywords cannot
appear in the same syntactic positions.

| Capture Mode Syntax |                     Corresponding Semantics                      |
| :-----------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------: |
|       `copy`        |     Capture "by-copy" where the resulting capture is mutable     |
|    `const copy`     | Capture "by-const-copy" where the resulting capture is immutable |
|        `ref`        |        Capture "by-reference" behaving as a C++ reference        |
|     `const ref`     |  Capture "by-const-reference" behaving as a C++ const reference  |

Capture modes can be used as
[default capture mode specifiers](#default-capture-mode) or for explicit
captures as shown in the example code below.

```
fn Example {
  var by_copy: i32 = 0;
  var by_const_copy: i32 = 0;
  var by_reference: i32 = 0;
  var by_const_reference: i32 = 0;

  let lambda: auto = fn [copy by_copy,
                         const copy by_const_copy,
                         ref by_reference,

>                          const ref by_const_reference] {

Reviewer: I'm having a hard time getting my brain to distinguish the keywords from the identifiers in this example. I can't tell if that's a problem with the syntax itself, or an artifact of the fact that these identifiers all have the keywords embedded in them. Could you rename the variables to avoid the latter problem?

  let lambda: auto = fn [ref, by_value, var by_object, copy by_copy] {
    by_value += 1;  // ❌ Invalid: Cannot modify a value binding.

    by_object += 1;  // ✅ Valid: `var`/object bindings are mutable BUT they only
                     // modify the instance attached to the lambda, not the
                     // variable declared in the outer scope.

    by_copy += 1;  // ❌ Invalid: Cannot modify a copy capture.

    by_reference += 1;  // ✅ Valid: Modifies the variable from the outer scope
  };

  lambda();
}
```

```
fn AlternativeExample {
  fn Invalid() -> auto {
    var s: String = "Hello world";
    let x: i32 = 0;
    return fn[ref s, x]() => (s, x);
  }

  // ❌ Invalid: returned lambda references `s` which is no longer alive when the lambda
  // is invoked. It also captures `x` by value which is similarly no longer alive.
  Print(Invalid()());
}
```

## Function Fields

**Proposal**: To mirror the behavior of init captures in C++, function fields
will support nothing-implies-`let` and `var` binding patterns. These will be
annotated with a type and initialized with the right-hand-side of an equals
sign. The lifetime of a function field is the same as the lifetime of the

> function declaration or lambda in which it exists.

Reviewer: I think we should specify this slightly differently:

```suggestion
**Proposal**: Function fields mirror the behavior of init captures in C++.
A function field definition consists of an irrefutable pattern, `=`, and an initializer.
It matches the pattern with the initializer when the function definition is evaluated.
The bindings in the pattern have the same lifetime as the function, and their scope
extends to the end of the function body.
```

This is more general than what we've discussed so far, because it allows things like `fn [(a: auto, b: auto) = Foo()] {...}`, but that generalization seems desirable.

Reviewer 2: (Pretty sure this is addressed, resolving)

<!-- toc -->

## Table of contents

-   [Abstract](#abstract)
-   [Syntax Overview](#syntax-overview)
    -   [Succinctly](#succinctly)
    -   [Alternative Considered: Terse vs Elaborated](#alternative-considered-terse-vs-elaborated)
-   [Introducer](#introducer)
    -   [Alternative Considered: Sigil](#alternative-considered-sigil)
-   [Positional Parameters](#positional-parameters)
    -   [Positional Parameter Restrictions](#positional-parameter-restrictions)
        -   [Alternative Considered: Additional Restriction](#alternative-considered-additional-restriction)
-   [Function Captures](#function-captures)
    -   [Capture Modes](#capture-modes)
        -   [Future Work: Reference Captures](#future-work-reference-captures)
    -   [Default Capture Mode](#default-capture-mode)
        -   [Alternative Considered: Middle vs Beginning](#alternative-considered-middle-vs-beginning)
-   [Function Fields](#function-fields)
-   [Copy Semantics](#copy-semantics)
-   [Self and Recursion](#self-and-recursion)
    -   [Alternative Considered: Recursive Self](#alternative-considered-recursive-self)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)

<!-- tocstop -->

> ## Abstract

Reviewer 2: It would be good to add a background section that provides reference links for Lambdas in other languages -- at least C++, Swift, and Rust.

This document proposes a path forward to add lambdas to Carbon. It further
proposes augmenting function declarations to create a more continuous syntax
between the two categories of functions. In short, both lambdas and function
declarations will be introduced with the `fn` keyword. The presence of a name
distinguishes a function declaration from a lambda expression, and the rest of
the syntax applies to both kinds. See [Syntax Overview](#syntax-overview) for

> more.

Reviewer 2: We should probably merge the content here and the PR description.

## Syntax Overview

**Proposal**: A largely continuous syntax between lambdas and function
declarations.

At a high level, lambdas and function declarations will look like the following.

```
let lambda1: auto = fn => T.Make();

> let lambda2: auto = fn []() -> T { return T.Make(); };

Reviewer 2: I understand this and the below are just illustrating where the `[]`s and `()`s go, but I suspect we'll want to not accept empty `[]`s at least... Would it make sense to use some pseudo syntax to indicate that there's something inside? Or to have a more examples?

```

Functions support [captures](#function-captures), [fields](#function-fields) and
deduced parameters in the square brackets. In addition, `self: Self` or
`addr self: Self*` can be added to the square brackets of function declarations
that exist inside class or interface definitions.

```
fn Foo(x: X) {
  let lambda: auto = fn [var x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(x, y); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[var x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(x, y); }
}
```

Functions also support so-called
["positional parameters"](#positional-parameters) that are defined at their
point of use using a dollar sign and a non-negative integer. They are implicitly
of type `auto`.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn { Print($0); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration { Print($0); }
}
```

Of course, functions can also have named parameters, but a single function can't
have both named and positional parameters.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn(v: auto) { Print(v); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration(v: auto) { Print(v); }
}
```

And deduced parameters.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); }
}
```

> ### Succinctly

Reviewer 2: Not sure what this section heading means....

(I fear it may be ... too succinct? I'll see myself out.)

Function definitions and lambda expressions have one of the following syntactic
forms (where items in square brackets are optional and independent):

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] `=>` _expression_
\[`;`\]

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] \[`->`
_return-type_\] `{` _statements_ `}`

The first form is a shorthand for the second: "`=>` _expression_ `;`" is
equivalent to "`-> auto { return` _expression_ `; }`".

_implicit-parameters_ consists of square brackets enclosing a optional default
capture mode and any number of explicit captures, function fields, and deduced
parameters, all separated by commas. The default capture mode (if any) must come
first; the other items can appear in any order. If _implicit-parameters_ is
omitted, it is equivalent to `[]`.

> The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function declaration or a
> lambda expression. The trailing `;` in the first form is required for a function
> declaration, but is not part of the syntax of a lambda expression.

Reviewer 2: I think this is just trying to speak to definition syntaxes.

```suggestion
The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function definition or a
lambda expression. The trailing `;` in the first form is required for a function
definition, but is not part of the syntax of a lambda expression.
```

|         D          |                                                Explicit Parameters                                                 |
|         E1         |           Body of Statements (no return value) ([positional parameters](#positional-parameters) allowed)           |
|         E2         |          Body of Statements (with return value) ([positional parameters](#positional-parameters) allowed)          |
|         E3         |         Body of Statements (no return value) ([positional parameters](#positional-parameters) disallowed)          |
|         E4         |        Body of Statements (with return value) ([positional parameters](#positional-parameters) disallowed)         |
|         F          |                                                Required Return Type                                                |
|         G          |                                             Function Declaration Name                                              |

```
// Lambdas (all the following are in an expression context and are
// themselves expressions)

fn => A1

> fn[B, C] => A1
> 
> fn(D) => A2
> 
> fn[B, C](D) => A2
> 
> fn { E1; }
> 
> fn -> F { E2; }
> 
> fn[B, C] { E1; }
> 
> fn[B, C] -> F { E2; }
> 
> fn(D) { E3; }
> 
> fn(D) -> F { E4; }
> 
> fn[B, C](D) { E3; }
> 
> fn[B, C](D) -> F { E4; }

Reviewer 2: Adding some whitespace based on some bikeshed-y discussion in the syntax channel...

```suggestion
fn [B, C] => A1

fn (D) => A2

fn [B, C](D) => A2

fn { E1; }

fn -> F { E2; }

fn [B, C] { E1; }

fn [B, C] -> F { E2; }

fn (D) { E3; }

fn (D) -> F { E4; }

fn [B, C](D) { E3; }

fn [B, C](D) -> F { E4; }
```

```

```
// Function Declarations (all the following are allowed as statements in a
// function body or as declarations in other scopes)

fn G => A1;

fn G[B, C] => A1;

fn G(D) => A2;

fn G[B, C](D) => A2;

fn G { E1; }

fn G -> F { E2; }

fn G[B, C] { E1; }

fn G[B, C] -> F { E2; }

fn G(D) { E3; }

fn G(D) -> F { E4; }

fn G[B, C](D) { E3; }

fn G[B, C](D) -> F { E4; }
```

> ### Alternative Considered: Terse vs Elaborated

Reviewer 2: The alternatives considered are spread throughout the proposal rather than grouped at the bottom which I think makes it a little bit harder to get a sense of what the actual proposal is.

But maybe more importantly, it would be good to try to summarize the pros, cons, and what tipped the scales to not pursue the alternative for each one. That's an important part of the structure we typically want in proposals.

created another cliff where they needed to switch from the sigil to the `fn`
keyword, on top of adding a name. Ultimately these downsides suggested that a
continuous syntax was the better path forward, even though the minimal lambda
syntax would be a bit less terse.

## Introducer

**Proposal**: Introduce with the `fn` keyword to mirror function declarations.
If a statement or declaration begins with `fn`, a name is required and it
becomes a function declaration. Otherwise, if in an expression context, `fn`
introduces a lambda.

```
let lambda1: auto = fn => T.Make();

let lambda2: auto = fn []() -> T { return T.Make(); };

fn FunctionDeclaration1 => T.Make();

fn FunctionDeclaration2[]() -> T { return T.Make(); }
```

### Alternative Considered: Sigil

Introduce with a sigil, such as `$` or `@`. Since introducer punctuation is such
a scarce resource, and since there was no consensus on what sigil would best
represent a lambda, and since there was a desire to create a more continuous
syntax between lambdas and function declarations, this alternative was decided
against.

```
let lambda1: auto = @ => T.Make();

let lambda2: auto = @[]() -> T { return T.Make(); };
```

> ## Positional Parameters

Reviewer 2: As I think Swift is one of the few other languages that has a similar feature, it would be good to a) mention that and b) indicate what if any things really differ between them.

way of a leads question
([#3860](https://github.com/carbon-language/carbon-lang/issues/3860)) and was
decided against.

## Function Captures

**Proposal**: Function captures in Carbon mirror the non-init captures of C++. A
function capture declaration consists of a capture mode (for `var` captures)
followed by the name of a binding from the enclosing scope, and makes that
identifier available in the inner function body. The lifetime of a capture is
the lifetime of the function in which it exists. For example...

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(fn [var handle] { handle.Process(); });
  thread.Join();
}
```

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  fn MyThread[handle]() { handle.Process(); }
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(MyThread);
  thread.Join();
}
```

### Capture Modes

**Proposal**: `let` and `var` can appear as function captures. They behave as
they would in regular bindings.

To prevent ambiguities, captures can only exist on functions where the
definition is attached to the declaration. This means they are supported on
lambdas and they are supported on function declarations that are immediately

> defined, but they are not supported on forward-declared functions.

Reviewer 2: Should this also mention only being supported inside the body of another function?

Or, alternatively, in an expression (lambda) or statement (function) context?

Author: Made this change to both captures and function fields sections :)

captures as shown in the example code below.

```
fn Example {
  var a: i32 = 0;
  var b: i32 = 0;

  let lambda: auto = fn [a, var b] {
    a += 1;  // ❌ Invalid: by-value captures are immutable

    b += 1;  // ✅ Valid: Modifies the captured copy of the by-object capture
  };

  lambda();
}
```

```
fn Example {
  fn Invalid() -> auto {
    var s: String = "Hello world";
    return fn[s]() => s;
  }

  // ❌ Invalid: returned lambda references `s` which is no longer alive
  // when the lambda is invoked.
  Print(Invalid()());
}
```

Note: If a function object F has mutable state, either because it has a
by-object capture or because it has a by-object function field, then a call to F
should require the callee to be a reference expression rather than a value
expression. We need a mutable handle to the function in order to be able to
mutate its mutable state.

#### Future Work: Reference Captures

Much discussion has been had so far about the implications of capturing by
reference. For now, such behavior is supported not through captures but instead
through function fields formed from the address of an object in the outer scope.

> It is imperative that more work be done in this area to address the erganomic

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is imperative that more work be done in this area to address the ergonomic
```

Author: Thanks! Fixed :)

  fn FunctionDeclaration(v: auto) { Print(v); }
}
```

And deduced parameters.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); }
}
```

<h3 id="syntax-overview-succinctly">Succinctly</h3>

Function definitions have one of the following syntactic forms (where items in
square brackets are optional and independent):

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] `=>` _expression_
`;`

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] \[`->`
_return-type_\] `{` _statements_ `}`

The first form is a shorthand for the second: "`=>` _expression_ `;`" is
equivalent to "`-> auto { return` _expression_ `; }`".

_implicit-parameters_ consists of square brackets enclosing a optional default
capture mode and any number of explicit captures, function fields, and deduced
parameters, all separated by commas. The default capture mode (if any) must come
first; the other items can appear in any order. If _implicit-parameters_ is
omitted, it is equivalent to `[]`.

The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function declaration or a
lambda expression.

> The presence of tuple-pattern determines whether the function body uses named or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The presence of _tuple-pattern_ determines whether the function body uses named or
```

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn(v: auto) { Print(v); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration(v: auto) { Print(v); }
}
```

And deduced parameters.

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); };

  fn FunctionDeclaration[T:! Printable](t: T) { Print(t); }
}
```

### Succinctly

Function definitions have one of the following syntactic forms (where items in
square brackets are optional and independent):

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] `=>` _expression_
`;`

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] \[`->`
_return-type_\] `{` _statements_ `}`

The first form is a shorthand for the second: "`=>` _expression_ `;`" is
equivalent to "`-> auto { return` _expression_ `; }`".

_implicit-parameters_ consists of square brackets enclosing a optional default
capture mode and any number of explicit captures, function fields, and deduced
parameters, all separated by commas. The default capture mode (if any) must come
first; the other items can appear in any order. If _implicit-parameters_ is
omitted, it is equivalent to `[]`.

The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function declaration or a

> lambda expression.

Reviewer 3: I think we're missing a description of the behavior of the trailing `;` here. How about something like:

```suggestion
Function definitions and lambda expressions have one of the following syntactic forms (where items in
square brackets are optional and independent):

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] `=>` _expression_
\[`;`\]

`fn` \[_name_\] \[_implicit-parameters_\] \[_tuple-pattern_\] \[`->`
_return-type_\] `{` _statements_ `}`

The first form is a shorthand for the second: "`=>` _expression_ `;`" is
equivalent to "`-> auto { return` _expression_ `; }`".

_implicit-parameters_ consists of square brackets enclosing a optional default
capture mode and any number of explicit captures, function fields, and deduced
parameters, all separated by commas. The default capture mode (if any) must come
first; the other items can appear in any order. If _implicit-parameters_ is
omitted, it is equivalent to `[]`.

The presence of _name_ determines whether this is a function declaration or a
lambda expression. The trailing `;` in the first form is required for a function declaration, but is not part of the syntax of a lambda expression.
```

arguments required by the function. The function body is free to omit
lower-numbered parameters (ex: `fn { Print($10); }`).

```
// A lambda that takes two positional parameters being used as a comparator
Sort(my_list, fn => $0 < $1);
```

### Positional Parameter Restrictions

**Proposal**: There are two restrictions applied to functions with positional
parameters. The first restriction is that the definitions of function
declarations must be attached to the declarations. The second restriction is
that positional parameters can only be used in a context where there is exactly
one enclosing function without an explicit parameter list. For example...

```
fn Foo1 {
  fn Bar1 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo1 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo2 {
  Print($0);
  fn Bar2 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo2 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo3 {
  fn Bar3 {
    Print($0);  // ❌ Invalid: Foo3 is already using positional parameters
  }
}

fn Foo4() {
  fn Bar4 {
    Print($0);  // ✅ Valid: Foo4 has explicit parameters
  }
}

fn Foo5 {
  fn Bar5() {}  // ✅ Valid: Bar5 has explicit parameters
}

fn Foo6() {
  my_list.Sort(

>     fn => $0 < $1  // ✅ Valid: Foo6 has explicit parameters

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    fn => ($0 < $1)  // ✅ Valid: Foo6 has explicit parameters
```

Operator precedence thing: is this intended to evaluate as `(fn => $0) < $1` or `fn => ($0 < $1)`? I suspect we might not want to define precedence between `fn =>` and `<` and, as a consequence, parentheses would be required to disambiguate. It doesn't seem like the proposal is addressing precedence, which seems fine, but just suggesting the edit in the example for clarity.

  );
}
```

#### Alternative Considered: Additional Restriction

In addition to the proposed restrictions, an additional restriction was
considered. That being, visibility of functions with positional parameters could
be restricted to only non-public interfaces. **This alternative will be put
forth as a leads question before a decision is made.**

> ## Function Captures

Reviewer 3: Something it might be good to mention here:

If a function object `F` has mutable state, either because it has a non-`const` `copy` capture or because it has a `var` function field, then a call to `F` should require the callee to be a reference expression rather than a value expression. We need a mutable handle to the function in order to be able to mutate its mutable state.

Author: Added a note with this

a binding from the enclosing scope, and makes that identifier available in the
inner function body. The lifetime of a capture is the lifetime of the function
in which it exists. For example...

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(fn [copy handle] { handle.Process(); });
  thread.Join();
}
```

```
fn Foo() {
  let handle: Handle = Handle.Get();
  fn MyThread[copy]() { handle.Process(); }
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(MyThread);
  thread.Join();
}
```

### Capture Modes

**Proposal**: `copy`, `ref`, `const copy` and `const ref` can appear as function
captures. They behave as specified in the following table:

| Capture Mode Syntax |                     Corresponding Semantics                      |
| :-----------------: | :--------------------------------------------------------------: |
|       `copy`        |     Capture "by-copy" where the resulting capture is mutable     |
|    `const copy`     | Capture "by-const-copy" where the resulting capture is immutable |
|        `ref`        |        Capture "by-reference" behaving as a C++ reference        |

> |     `const ref`     |  Capture "by-const-reference" behaving as a C++ const reference  |

Reviewer 3: Suppose I want to write this:
```carbon
let a: String = "long string I'd rather not make a copy of";
DoThingWithLazyGetter(fn [???] => a);
```

Can a `ref` capture be used to capture a `let` binding? If so, what happens -- does that create a temporary and capture a reference to it, or does that capture a value as if by `[a: auto = a]`?

If not, I think the outcome is that there isn't a way to capture a `let` binding without renaming it. You can use a function field, but our name shadowing rules would suggest that you must use a new name for the function field. I wonder if it'd be worth adding syntax for capturing a value as a value, rather than as an object.

Reviewer 3: I think we still need an answer here -- I think wanting to capture a local `let` binding will be a common case, and requiring it to be renamed seems unsatisfying from an ergonomic perspective.

Reviewer 2: Just to clarify -- this is now addressed.

definition is attached to the declaration. This means they are supported on
lambdas and they are supported on function declarations that are immediately
defined, but they are not supported on forward-declared functions.

```
fn Foo() {
  var h: Handle = Handle.Get();
  var thread: Thread = Thread.Make(fn [a: auto = h; var b: auto = h] {
    a.Process();  // ❌ Invalid: Cannot call mutating methods on value bindings
    b.Process();  // ✅ Valid: Can mutate object bindings
  });
  thread.Join();
}
```

### Alternative Considered: No Function Fields

Alternatively, by-value and by-object capturing could serve the same purpose.
This was decided against because capturing is not as expressive as general
purpose binding patterns. The lack of an initializing expression would create an
ergonomic burden.

## Copy Semantics

**Proposal**: To mirror the behavior of C++, function declarations and lambdas
will be as copyable as their contained function fields and function captures.
This means that, if a function holds a by-object function field, if the type of
the field is copyable, so too is the function that contains it. This also

> applies to by-copy and by-const-copy captures.

Reviewer 3: Just to check my understanding:
```carbon
// Returns the number of times it's been called.
fn Counter[var n: i32 = 0]() { ++n; return n; }

fn Run() {
  Print(Counter());
  Print(Counter());
  var my_counter: auto = Counter;
  Print(my_counter());
  Print(my_counter());
  Print(Counter());
}
```
... would print 1 2 3 4 3.

Author: Yes that is correct

By-reference and by-const-reference captures are a bit different, because even
if the underlying type is not copyable, the reference to that object is always
copyable.

The final case is by-value function fields. Since C++ const references, when
made into fields of a class, prevent the class from being copied, so too should
by-value function fields prevent the function in which it is contained from

> being copied.

Reviewer 3: Should we distinguish between copy construction and copy assignment here? Const reference fields in C++ only prevent copy assignment, not copy construction.

> ## Self and Recursion

Reviewer 3: Given the direction in #3720, an expression of the form `x.(F)`, where `F` is a function with a `self` or `addr self` parameter, produces a callable that holds the value of `x`, and does not hold the value of `F`. As a consequence, I think we can't support combining captures and function fields with a `self` parameter under that model.

Would that be a reasonable restriction to impose here?

Author: Sure! I'm fine with that. Added a note about this.

-   [Function Captures](#function-captures)
    -   [Capture Modes](#capture-modes)
        -   [Alternative Considered: By-Value Captures](#alternative-considered-by-value-captures)
    -   [Default Capture Mode](#default-capture-mode)
        -   [Alternative Considered: Middle vs Beginning](#alternative-considered-middle-vs-beginning)
-   [Function Fields](#function-fields)
    -   [Alternative Considered: No Function Fields](#alternative-considered-no-function-fields)
-   [Copy Semantics](#copy-semantics)
-   [Self and Recursion](#self-and-recursion)
    -   [Alternative Considered: Recursive Self](#alternative-considered-recursive-self)
-   [Rationale](#rationale)

<!-- tocstop -->

## Abstract

This document proposes a path forward to add lambdas to Carbon. It further
proposes augmenting function declarations to create a more continuous syntax
between the two categories of functions. In short, both lambdas and function
declarations will be introduced with the `fn` keyword. The presence of a name
distinguishes a declaration from a lambda expression, and the rest of the syntax

> applies to both kinds. See [Syntax Overview](#syntax-overview) for more.

Reviewer 2: We have a convention of keeping the abstract in the document and the proposal summary th e same -- I feel like there is a bit of content in each, could you merge them?

parameters. The first restriction is that the definitions of function
declarations must be attached to the declarations. The second restriction is
that positional parameters can only be used in a context where there is exactly
one enclosing function without an explicit parameter list. For example...

```
fn Foo1 {
  fn Bar1 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo1 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo2 {
  Print($0);
  fn Bar2 {}  // ❌ Invalid: Foo2 is already using positional parameters
}

fn Foo3 {
  fn Bar3 {
    Print($0);  // ❌ Invalid: Foo3 is already using positional parameters
  }
}

fn Foo4() {
  fn Bar4 {
    Print($0);  // ✅ Valid: Foo4 has explicit parameters
  }
}

fn Foo5 {
  fn Bar5() {}  // ✅ Valid: Bar5 has explicit parameters
}

fn Foo6() {
  my_list.Sort(
    fn => $0 < $1  // ✅ Valid: Foo6 has explicit parameters
  );
}
```

#### Alternative Considered: Additional Restriction

In addition to the proposed restrictions, an additional restriction was
considered. That being, visibility of functions with positional parameters could
be restricted to only non-public interfaces. **This alternative will be put

> forth as a leads question before a decision is made.**

Reviewer 3: This leads question has now been answered: #3860

Reviewer 2: Resolving as this is nicely listed as an alternative and cites the issue.

that exist inside class or interface definitions.

```
fn Foo(x: i32) {
  // In a variable:
  let lambda: auto = fn [var x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(++x, ++y); };
  // Equivalent in C++23:
  // const auto lambda = [x, y = int32_t{0}] mutable -> void { Print(++x, ++y); };

  // In a function call:
  Foo(fn [var x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(++x, ++y); });
  // Equivalent in C++23:
  // Foo([x, y = int32_t{0}] mutable -> void { Print(++x, ++y); });

  fn FunctionDeclaration[var x, var y: i32 = 0] { Print(++x, ++y); }
  // Equivalent in C++23:

>   // Such a function declaration is not possible in C++.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // auto FunctionDeclaration = [x, y = int32_t{0}] mutable -> void { Print(++x, ++y); };
```

```
fn Foo() {
  let lambda: auto = fn { Print($0); };
  // Equivalent in C++23:

>   // Such a lambda is not possible in C++.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // auto lambda = [](auto _0, auto...) -> void { Print(_0); };
```

  // Equivalent in Swift:
  // let lambda = { Print($0) };

  fn FunctionDeclaration { Print($0); }

>   // Equivalent in C++23:
>   // Such a function declaration is not possible in C++.
>   // Equivalent in Swift:
>   // Such a function declaration is not possible in Swift.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  // Equivalent in C++23:
  // auto FunctionDeclaration = [](auto _0, auto...) -> void { Print(_0); };
  // Equivalent in Swift:
  // let FunctionDeclaration = { Print($0) };
```
given that
```carbon
  fn FunctionDeclaration { Print($0); }
```
is equivalent to
```carbon
  let FunctionDeclaration: auto = fn { Print($0); };
```
